.. _streams:

.. py:module:: walrus

Streams
=======

`Redis streams <https://redis.io/topics/streams-intro>`_ is a new data-type
available in Redis 5.0 which provides a persistent, append-only log. Redis
streams are a complex topic, so I strongly recommend reading `the streams
introduction <https://redis.io/topics/streams-intro>`_.

I like to think of streams as having two modes of operation:

* standalone-mode: streams act much like every other data-structure
* consumer-groups: streams become stateful, with state such as "which messages
  were read?", "who read what?", etc are tracked within Redis.

:py:class:`Stream` objects in walrus can be used standalone or within the
context of a :py:class:`ConsumerGroup`.

Standalone streams
------------------

In standalone mode, streams behave much like every other data-structure in
Redis. By this, I mean that they act as a dumb container: you append items, you
read them, you delete them -- everything happens explicitly. Streams support
the following operations:

* Add a new item (``XADD``) - :py:meth:`Stream.add`
* Read a range of items (``XRANGE``) - :py:meth:`Stream.range`
* Read new messages, optionally blocking (``XREAD``) - :py:meth:`Stream.read`
* Delete one or more items (``XDEL``) - :py:meth:`Stream.delete`
* Get the length of the stream (``XLEN``) - :py:meth:`Stream.length`
* Trim the length to a given size (``XTRIM``) - :py:meth:`Stream.trim`
* Set the maximum allowable ID (``XSETID``) - :py:meth:`Stream.set_id`

To get started with streams, we'll create a :py:class:`Database` instance and
use it to instantiate a :py:class:`Stream`:

.. code-block:: python

    from walrus import Database  # A subclass of the redis-py Redis client.

    db = Database()
    stream = db.Stream('stream-a')  # Create a new stream instance.

When adding data to a stream, Redis can automatically provide you with a unique
timestamp-based identifier, which is almost always what you want. When a new
message is added, the message id is returned:

.. code-block:: python

    msgid = stream.add({'message': 'hello streams'})
    print(msgid)

    # Prints something like:
    # b'1539008591844-0'

Message ids generated by Redis consist of a millisecond timestamp along with a
sequence number (for ordering messages that arrived on the same millisecond).
Let's :py:meth:`~Stream.add` a couple more items:

.. code-block:: python

    msgid2 = stream.add({'message': 'message 2'})
    msgid3 = stream.add({'message': 'message 3'})

Ranges of records can be read using either the :py:meth:`~Stream.range` method,
or using Python's slice notation. The message ids provided as the range
endpoints are inclusive when using the range API:

.. code-block:: python

    # Get messages 2 and newer:
    messages = stream[msgid2:]

    # messages contains:
    [(b'1539008914283-0', {b'message': b'message 2'}),
     (b'1539008918230-0', {b'message': b'message 3'})]

    # We can use the "step" parameter to limit the number of records returned.
    messages = stream[msgid::2]

    # messages contains the first two messages:
    [(b'1539008903588-0', {b'message': b'hello, stream'}),
     (b'1539008914283-0', {b'message': b'message 2'})]

    # Get all messages in stream:
    messages = list(stream)
    [(b'1539008903588-0', {b'message': b'hello, stream'}),
     (b'1539008914283-0', {b'message': b'message 2'}),
     (b'1539008918230-0', {b'message': b'message 3'})]

The size of streams can be managed by deleting messages by id, or by "trimming"
the stream, which removes the oldest messages. The desired size is specified
when issuing a :py:meth:`~Stream.trim` operation, though, due to the internal
implementation of the stream data-structures, the size is considered
approximate by default.

.. code-block:: python

    # Adding and deleting a message:
    msgid4 = stream.add({'message': 'delete me'})
    del stream[msgid4]

    # How many items are in the stream?
    print(len(stream))  # Prints 3.

To see how trimming works, let's create another stream and fill it with 1000
items, then request it to be trimmed to 10 items:

.. code-block:: python

    # Add 1000 items to "stream-2".
    stream2 = db.Stream('stream-2')
    for i in range(1000):
        stream2.add({'data': 'message-%s' % i})

    # Trim stream-2 to (approximately) 10 most-recent messages.
    nremoved = stream2.trim(10)
    print(nremoved)
    # 909
    print(len(stream2))
    # 91

    # To trim to an exact number, specify `approximate=False`:
    stream2.trim(10, approximate=False)  # Returns 81.
    print(len(stream2))
    # 10

The previous examples show how to :py:meth:`~Stream.add`, read a
:py:meth:`~Stream.range` of messages, :py:meth:`~Stream.delete` messages, and
manage the size using the :py:meth:`~Stream.trim` method. When processing a
continuous stream of events, though, it may be desirable to **block** until
messages are added. For this we can use the :py:meth:`~Stream.read` API, which
supports blocking until messages become available.

.. code-block:: python

    # By default, calling `stream.read()` returns all messages in the stream:
    stream.read()

    # Returns:
    [(b'1539008903588-0', {b'message': b'hello, stream'}),
     (b'1539008914283-0', {b'message': b'message 2'}),
     (b'1539008918230-0', {b'message': b'message 3'})]

We can pass a message id to :py:meth:`~Stream.read`, and unlike the slicing
operations, this id is considered the "last-read message" and acts as an
**exclusive** lower-bound:

.. code-block:: python

    # Read any messages newer than msgid2.
    stream.read(last_id=msgid2)

    # Returns:
    [(b'1539008918230-0', {b'message': b'message 3'})]

    # This returns None since there are no messages newer than msgid3.
    stream.read(last_id=msgid3)

We can make :py:meth:`~Stream.read` blocking by specifying a special id,
``"$"``, and a ``block`` in milliseconds. To block forever, you can use
``block=0``.

.. code-block:: python

    # This will block for 2 seconds, after which an empty list is returned
    # (provided no messages are added while waiting).
    stream.read(block=2000, last_id='$')

While its possible to build consumers using these APIs, the client is still
responsible for keeping track of the last-read message ID and coming up with
semantics for retrying failed messages, etc. In the next section, we'll see how
consumer groups can greatly simplify building a stream processing pipeline.

Consumer groups
---------------

In consumer-group mode, streams retain the behaviors of standalone mode, adding
functionality which makes them *stateful*. What state is tracked?

* Read any unseen messages (``XREAD``) - :py:meth:`ConsumerGroupStream.read`
* List messages that were read, but not acknowledged (``XPENDING``) - :py:meth:`ConsumerGroupStream.pending`
* Acknowledge one or more pending messages (``XACK``) - :py:meth:`ConsumerGroupStream.ack`
* Claim one or more pending messages for re-processing (``XCLAIM``) - :py:meth:`ConsumerGroupStream.claim`

:py:class:`ConsumerGroup` objects provide the building-blocks for robust
message processing pipelines or task queues. Ordinarily this type of stuff
would be implemented by the client -- having it in Redis means that we have a
single, unified interface (rather than implementation-specific, with all the
bugs that likely entails).  Furthermore, consumer group state is tracked by the
RDB and replicated.

.. code-block:: python

    # Consumer groups require that a stream exist before the group can be
    # created, so we have to add an empty message.
    stream_keys = ['stream-a', 'stream-b', 'stream-c']
    for stream in stream_keys:
        db.xadd(stream, {'data': ''})

    # Create a consumer-group for streams a, b, and c. We will mark all
    # messages as having been processed, so only messages added after the
    # creation of the consumer-group will be read.
    cg = db.consumer_group('cg-abc', stream_keys)
    cg.create()  # Create the consumer group.
    cg.set_id('$')

To read from all the streams in a consumer group, we can use the
:py:meth:`ConsumerGroupStream.read` method. Since we marked all messages as
read and have not added anything new since creating the consumer group, the
return value is an empty list:

.. code-block:: python

   resp = cg.read()

   # Returns an empty list:
   []

For convenience, walrus exposes the individual streams within a consumer group
as attributes on the :py:class:`ConsumerGroup` instance. Let's add some
messages to streams *a*, *b*, and *c*:

.. code-block:: python

    cg.stream_a.add({'message': 'new a'})
    cg.stream_b.add({'message': 'new for b'})
    for i in range(10):
        cg.stream_c.add({'message': 'c-%s' % i})

Now let's try reading from the consumer group again. We'll pass ``count=1`` so
that we read no more than one message from each stream in the group:

.. code-block:: python

    # Read up to one message from each stream in the group.
    cg.read(count=1)

    # Returns:
    [('stream-a', [(b'1539023088125-0', {b'message': b'new a'})]),
     ('stream-b', [(b'1539023088125-0', {b'message': b'new for b'})]),
     ('stream-c', [(b'1539023088126-0', {b'message': b'c-0'})])]

We've now read all the unread messages from streams *a* and *b*, but stream *c*
still has messages. Calling ``read()`` again will give us the next unread
message from stream *c*:

.. code-block:: python

    # Read up to 1 message from each stream in the group. Since
    # we already read everything in streams a and b, we will only
    # get the next unread message in stream c.
    cg.read(count=1)

    # Returns:
    [('stream-c', [(b'1539023088126-1', {b'message': b'c-1'})])]

When using consumer groups, messages that are read need to be **acknowledged**.
Let's look at the **pending** (read but unacknowledged) messages from
stream *a* using the :py:meth:`~ConsumerGroupStream.pending` method, which
returns a list of metadata about each unacknowledged message:

.. code-block:: python

    # We read one message from stream a, so we should see one pending message.
    cg.stream_a.pending()

    # Returns a list of:
    # [message id, consumer name, message age, delivery count]
    [[b'1539023088125-0', b'cg-abc.c1', 22238, 1]]

To acknowledge receipt of a message and remove it from the pending list, use
the :py:meth:`~ConsumerGroupStream.ack` method on the consumer group stream:

.. code-block:: python

    # View the pending message list for stream a.
    pending_list = cg.stream_a.pending()
    msg_id = pending_list[0]['message_id']

    # Acknowledge the message.
    cg.stream_a.ack(msg_id)

    # Returns number of pending messages successfully acknowledged:
    1

Consumer groups have the concept of individual **consumers**. These might be
workers in a process pool, for example. Note that the
:py:meth:`~ConsumerGroupStream.pending` method returned the consumer name as
``"cg-abc.c1"``. Walrus uses the consumer group name + ``".c1"`` as the name
for the default consumer name. To create another consumer within a given group,
we can use the :py:meth:`~ConsumerGroupStream.consumer` method:

.. code-block:: python

    # Create a second consumer within the consumer group.
    cg2 = cg.consumer('cg-abc.c2')

Creating a new consumer within a consumer group does not affect the state of
the group itself. Calling :py:meth:`~ConsumerGroupStream.read` using our new
consumer will pick up from the last-read message, as you would expect:

.. code-block:: python

    # Read from our consumer group using the new consumer. Recall
    # that we read all the messages from streams a and b, and the
    # first two messages in stream c.
    cg2.read(count=1)

    # Returns:
    [('stream-c', [(b'1539023088126-2', {b'message': b'c-2'})])]

If we look at the pending message status for stream *c*, we will see that the
first and second messages were read by the consumer *"cg-abc.c1"* and the third
message was read by our new consumer, *"cg-abc.c2"*:

.. code-block:: python

    # What messages have been read, but were not acknowledged, from stream c?
    cg.stream_c.pending()

    # Returns list of [message id, consumer, message age, delivery count]:
    [{'message_id': b'1539023088126-0', 'consumer': b'cg-abc.c1',
      'time_since_delivered': 51329, 'times_delivered': 1}],
     {'message_id': b'1539023088126-1', 'consumer': b'cg-abc.c1',
      'time_since_delivered': 43772, 'times_delivered': 1},
     {'message_id': b'1539023088126-2', 'consumer': b'cg-abc.c2',
      'time_since_delivered': 5966, 'times_delivered': 1}]

Consumers can :py:meth:`~ConsumerGroupStream.claim` pending messages, which
transfers ownership of the message and returns a list of (message id, data)
tuples to the caller:

.. code-block:: python

    # Unpack the pending messages into a couple variables.
    mc1, mc2, mc3 = cg.stream_c.pending()

    # Claim the first message for consumer 2:
    cg2.stream_c.claim(mc1['message_id'])

    # Returns a list of (message id, data) tuples for the claimed messages:
    [(b'1539023088126-0', {b'message': b'c-0'})]

Re-inspecting the pending messages for stream *c*, we can see that the consumer
for the first message has changed and the message age has been reset:

.. code-block:: python

    # What messages are pending in stream c?
    cg.stream_c.pending()

    # Returns:
    [{'message_id': b'1539023088126-0', 'consumer': b'cg-abc.c2',
      'time_since_delivered': 2168, 'times_delivered': 1},
     {'message_id': b'1539023088126-1', 'consumer': b'cg-abc.c1',
      'time_since_delivered': 47141, 'times_delivered': 1},
     {'message_id': b'1539023088126-2', 'consumer': b'cg-abc.c2',
      'time_since_delivered': 9335, 'times_delivered': 1}]

The individual streams within the consumer group support a number of
useful APIs:

* ``consumer_group.stream.ack(*id_list)`` - acknowledge one or more messages
  read from the given stream.
* ``consumer_group.stream.add(data, id='*', maxlen=None, approximate=True)`` -
  add a new message to the stream. The ``maxlen`` parameter can be used to keep
  the stream from growing without bounds. If given, the ``approximate`` flag
  indicates whether the stream maxlen should be approximate or exact.
* ``consumer_group.stream.claim(*id_list)`` - claim one or more
  pending messages.
* ``consumer_group.stream.delete(*id_list)`` - delete one or more messages
  by ID.
* ``consumer_group.stream.pending(start='-', stop='+', count=1000)`` - get the
  list of unacknowledged messages in the stream. The ``start`` and ``stop``
  parameters can be message ids, while the ``count`` parameter can be used to
  limit the number of results returned.
* ``consumer_group.stream.read(count=None, block=None)`` - monitor the
  stream for new messages within the context of the consumer group. This
  method can be made to block by specifying a ``block`` (or ``0`` to block
  forever).
* ``consumer_group.stream.set_id(id='$')`` - set the id of the last-read
  message for the consumer group. Use the special id ``"$"`` to indicate all
  messages have been read, or ``"0-0"`` to mark all messages as unread.
* ``consumer_group.stream.trim(count, approximate=True)`` - trim the stream to
  the given size.

TimeSeries
----------

Redis automatically uses the millisecond timestamp plus a sequence number to
uniquely identify messages added to a stream. This makes streams a natural fit
for time-series data. To simplify working with streams as time-series in
Python, you can use the special :py:class:`TimeSeries` helper class, which acts
just like the :py:class:`ConsumerGroup` from the previous section with the
exception that it can translate between Python ``datetime`` objects and message
ids automatically.

To get started, we'll create a :py:class:`TimeSeries` instance, specifying the
stream keys, just like we did with :py:class:`ConsumerGroup`:

.. code-block:: python

    # Create a time-series consumer group named "demo-ts" for the
    # streams s1 and s2.
    ts = db.time_series('demo-ts', ['s1', 's2'])

    # Add dummy data and create the consumer group.
    db.xadd('s1', {'': ''}, id='0-1')
    db.xadd('s2', {'': ''}, id='0-1')
    ts.create()
    ts.set_id('$')  # Do not read the dummy items.

Let's add some messages to the time-series, one for each day between January
1st and 10th, 2018:

.. code-block:: python

    from datetime import datetime, timedelta

    date = datetime(2018, 1, 1)
    for i in range(10):
        ts.s1.add({'message': 's1-%s' % date}, id=date)
        date += timedelta(days=1)

We can read messages from the stream using the familiar slicing API. For
example, to read 3 messages starting at January 2nd, 2018:

.. code-block:: python

    ts.s1[datetime(2018, 1, 2)::3]

    # Returns messages for Jan 2nd - 4th:
    [<Message s1 1514872800000-0: {'message': 's1-2018-01-02 00:00:00'}>,
     <Message s1 1514959200000-0: {'message': 's1-2018-01-03 00:00:00'}>,
     <Message s1 1515045600000-0: {'message': 's1-2018-01-04 00:00:00'}>]

Note that the values returned are :py:class:`Message` objects. Message objects
provide some convenience functions, such as extracting timestamp and sequence
values from stream message ids:

.. code-block:: python

    for message in ts.s1[datetime(2018, 1, 1)::3]:
        print(message.stream, message.timestamp, message.sequence, message.data)

    # Prints:
    s1 2018-01-01 00:00:00 0 {'message': 's1-2018-01-01 00:00:00'}
    s1 2018-01-02 00:00:00 0 {'message': 's1-2018-01-02 00:00:00'}
    s1 2018-01-03 00:00:00 0 {'message': 's1-2018-01-03 00:00:00'}

Let's add some messages to stream "s2" as well:

.. code-block:: python

    date = datetime(2018, 1, 1)
    for i in range(5):
        ts.s2.add({'message': 's2-%s' % date}, id=date)
        date += timedelta(days=1)

One difference between :py:class:`TimeSeries` and :py:class:`ConsumerGroup` is
what happens when reading from multiple streams. ConsumerGroup returns a
dictionary keyed by stream, along with a corresponding list of messages read
from each stream.  TimeSeries, however, returns a flat list of Message objects:

.. code-block:: python

    # Read up to 2 messages from each stream (s1 and s2):
    messages = ts.read(count=2)

    # "messages" is a list of messages from both streams:
    [<Message s1 1514786400000-0: {'message': 's1-2018-01-01 00:00:00'}>,
     <Message s2 1514786400000-0: {'message': 's2-2018-01-01 00:00:00'}>,
     <Message s1 1514872800000-0: {'message': 's1-2018-01-02 00:00:00'}>,
     <Message s2 1514872800000-0: {'message': 's2-2018-01-02 00:00:00'}>]

When inspecting pending messages within a :py:class:`TimeSeries` the message
ids are unpacked into (datetime, seq) 2-tuples:

.. code-block:: python

    ts.s1.pending()

    # Returns:
    [((datetime.datetime(2018, 1, 1, 0, 0), 0), 'events-ts.c', 1578, 1),
     ((datetime.datetime(2018, 1, 2, 0, 0), 0), 'events-ts.c', 1578, 1)]

    # Acknowledge the pending messages:
    for msgts_seq, _, _, _ in ts.s1.pending():
        ts.s1.ack(msgts_seq)

We can set the last-read message id using a datetime:

.. code-block:: python

    ts.s1.set_id(datetime(2018, 1, 1))

    # Next read will be 2018-01-02, ...
    ts.s1.read(count=2)

    # Returns:
    [<Message s1 1514872800000-0: {'message': 's1-2018-01-02 00:00:00'}>,
     <Message s1 1514959200000-0: {'message': 's1-2018-01-03 00:00:00'}>]

As with :py:class:`ConsumerGroup`, the :py:class:`TimeSeries` helper provides
stream-specific APIs for claiming unacknowledged messages, creating additional
consumers, etc.

Learning more
-------------

For more information, the following links may be helpful:

* `Redis streams introduction <https://redis.io/topics/streams-intro>`_.
* `Example multi-process task queue using walrus and streams <http://charlesleifer.com/blog/multi-process-task-queue-using-redis-streams/>`_.
* API docs for :py:class:`Stream`, :py:class:`ConsumerGroup`,
  :py:class:`ConsumerGroupStream` and :py:class:`TimeSeries`.
